Welcome to the Reinforcement Learning seminar. I'm Dr. Sarah Chen.
RL is fundamentally different from supervised learning — there are no labeled examples.
Instead, an agent interacts with an environment, takes actions, and receives scalar reward signals.
The agent's goal is to learn a policy — a mapping from states to actions — that maximizes reward.
The Markov Decision Process, or MDP, is the formal framework for RL problems.
An MDP is defined by states, actions, a transition function, a reward function, and a discount factor.
The discount factor gamma determines how much future rewards are valued relative to immediate ones.
A gamma close to 1 makes the agent far-sighted; close to 0 makes it greedy and short-sighted.
Value functions estimate expected cumulative reward from a given state under a given policy.
The Q-function extends this to state-action pairs — how good is taking action a in state s?
Q-learning is a model-free algorithm that iteratively updates Q-values using the Bellman equation.
Deep Q-Networks — DQN — use a neural network to approximate the Q-function over large state spaces.
DeepMind's Atari-playing agent used DQN to achieve superhuman performance on dozens of games.
Experience replay stores past transitions and samples them randomly during training.
This breaks temporal correlations in training data and improves data efficiency significantly.
Policy gradient methods directly optimize the policy by ascending the gradient of expected reward.
REINFORCE is the simplest policy gradient algorithm, though it suffers from high variance.
Actor-Critic methods combine a policy network with a value network to reduce variance.
The critic evaluates the current state; the actor updates the policy based on that evaluation.
Proximal Policy Optimization — PPO — is currently the most widely used RL algorithm in practice.
PPO constrains policy updates to avoid destructive large steps that degrade performance.
RLHF — Reinforcement Learning from Human Feedback — is how modern LLMs are fine-tuned.
Human raters rank model outputs; a reward model is trained on those preferences.
The language model is then fine-tuned with PPO against that reward model.
This is how GPT-4, Claude, and Gemini align their outputs with human preferences.
RL remains challenging due to sparse rewards, sample inefficiency, and reward hacking.
Reward hacking occurs when an agent finds unintended ways to maximize reward without achieving the goal.
Designing good reward functions is an open research problem — it's as much art as science.
For the assignment, implement a simple Q-learning agent on the FrozenLake environment from Gymnasium.
Focus on understanding the exploration-exploitation tradeoff. Questions? See you Thursday.